#Agile Cooperation in Corporate Environments

2015-09-08

<!--- tags: management agile -->

I watched a TED talk by [YVes Morieux](https://www.ted.com/talks/yves_morieux_how_too_many_rules_at_work_keep_you_from_getting_things_done) on how too many work rules keep you from getting things done. Lets go over the main points Morieux argues and how we can understand them in Scrum.

* Most corporations put the focus in contracts and well-specified interfaces. They optimize not getting work done, but finding blame when things go wrong, as this is what happens most of the time. Agile movement values people and cooperation more than contracts. Software development is not about collecting requirements upfront and defining interfaces and finding blame when things go wrong. None of these has to do anything with delivering working software. In a transparent Scrum project there is no blame. People can react fast to anomalies and it is not possible to accumulate individual fault. 

* Corporations are good at finding blame, partly, because they rely too much on measuring things. Metrics take a simplified view of the world and can be used to measure only simple things out of context. Metrics are used in corporations to assess both individual and project performance. People in corporate environments learn quickly to value good metrics over cooperation and getting work done. Metrics cannot objectively assess team cooperation and success (even if we count number of bugs in production). Some metrics are part of the Scrum process too, such as the various burn-down / up charts. In Scrum, the metrics intention is to help a team to learn about its own optimal velocity in order to make better future predictions and not to measure the team value. Metrics should never be part of a Scrum team success performance factors. Customer happiness and a working product should be the only metric of a Scrum team. Work transparency and constant customer involvement are part of Scrum team quality process.

* Corporations deal with failure and bad metrics by adding more metrics and more processes. Most corporations started as a set of informal startups, but have evolved into having complex processes to deal with managing size. A lot of energy is spent in having people understand and follow complex processes. A large part of the hard work in a corporation is done on the least valuable items for the product at hand - complying to internal processes. Scrum and agile teams have a way to compensate this trend, by treating process related tasks as product backlog items and being flexible on what is to optimize and where the real value is. Scrum is a bottom up movement, from the working teams to the top of the corporation management. The corporate management may resit Scrum, but as the time goes on the agile goal should be to reach a Scrum friendly corporation culture, where people and self-organizing teams are valued more than corporate processes. Control in agile corporations is not done by metric reports, but by actively getting involved daily into the projects.

<ins class='nfooter'><a id='fprev' href='#blog/2015/2015-09-11-Client-Contracts-in-Scrum.md'>Client Contracts in Scrum</a> <a id='fnext' href='#blog/2015/2015-09-04-Learning-in-Scrum.md'>Learning in Scrum</a></ins>
