#Customer Contracts in Scrum

2015-09-11

<!--- tags: management agile -->

One of the [core](http://agilemanifesto.org/) values of agile software development is the value of customer collaboration over contract negotiation. In traditional contract negotiation, customer is forced to think up-front in great detail what is needed. This puts pressure on the customer to cover most details at once and increases the chances specification may look good at moment, but it is not really what the customer needs, or will need when the product is finished.

The core agile value of customer collaboration is enforced by the agile principle of welcoming change. Change is hard to accept, but if it becomes a goal per se and part of the project mindset, change acceptance benefits first and the most the customer and then the development team, given they will have an ongoing happy customer.

Traditionally, a few selected people sit down with the customer up-front and negotiate the contract in as much details as possible and have the customer sign that. In an agile project, in order to achieve best results, the agile values are propagated to the customer. Instead of signing a contract on a agreed list of features reviewed by few people, it is made clear early on to the customer, that the customer is hiring a complete professional team that will continuously do its best to understand and convert into software the most valuable customer wishes. One cannot do agile in the hidden.

Ongoing collaboration concepts could be new to customers. Having a contract, even detailed makes perfect sense and it is the way to go. But rather that stick to the contract, the customer is made part of the development process. The team's daily work is transparent to the customer, for example, by having the customer have access to the daily updates of the sprint backlog board and follow the team progress and struggle. Customer is constantly being reassured on value optimization by observing how everyone on the team is trying to understand, think, and act on how to best address posed problems. Once the customer sees that a dedicated team is doing its best, the customer will tend to be more tolerant thinking about change. The customer will accept certain items may need a pivot at some point and learn to use constant participation to own advantage.

Customers may see less value in work to be done upfront and are willing to pay in general the minimum for a fixed price contract. Customers may know from experience that the project will very likely need more money, so they negotiate a minimum upfront. Having the customer directly collaborate on the daily work, increases the chance that the customer sees the real value of the work. Customer is then more likely to be flexible and more welcoming to overcome the original contract negotiated costs, or even *reduce* them. While reducing project work may look bad to the working team (and sometimes it is), a happy customer will advertise the team to the world, recommend them and come back.

A good scrum master and a capable product owner balance the need for the customer to know about the ongoing work details, from dealing with the actual work itself. The work is better left to the development team. Often the customer may fail to understand the separation from the start. The customer may insist several technologies and methodologies are used, because of various constrains or subjectivity. It is the duty of the development team to make clear to the customer that, unless a very strong and valid reason for a particular constrain is represented, it is the development team that knows best its own capabilities and can better figure out  given the circumstances what could be the most optimal solution for the customer problem.

Having the customer be part of such discussions with the entire team and listening to their arguments optimizes the peer synergy effect. Architectural spikes on the open points help the team and customer to quickly evaluate technology alternatives. Customer learns trusting the team. The whole team turns customer's needs into a working product of value using agile principles and methods.

<ins class='nfooter'><a id='fprev' href='#blog/2015/2015-09-29-Agile-Vocabulary.md'>Agile Vocabulary</a> <a id='fnext' href='#blog/2015/2015-09-08-Agile-Cooperation-in-Corporate-Environments.md'>Agile Cooperation in Corporate Environments</a></ins>
